---
layout: blog
title:  "I don't really like React"
date:   2025-03-13
categories: update
---

There are plenty of things to dislike about React. Cards on the table, I'm a hardcore Vue supporter. I even used its spiritual predecessor KnockoutJS back in the day. I know many of you likely have issues with Vue. I don't care. OP asked why people hate React, so I'm trying to give an honest answer. Talk to someone else if you dislike Vue.
About the whole "toxic" thing. If people are being crappy on online, that ain't cool and I ain't with that. The world is toxic enough without anyone adding to the pile. That said, some people do confuse toxic behavior with simple discomfort. I get it, we're all professionals and I imagine getting things done with React probably makes you feel good. Getting things done with Vue makes me feel good. Critiques against a thing that makes you feel good is bound to make you uncomfortable.

I think React did some pretty horrible stuff and now its stuck with it. It also did some good stuff. I freely admit a lot of what's dope about Vue 3 was inspired of lifted from React. I also think Evan You and the team put a tremendous amount of thought into making sure they took the Good Stuff while leaving the Bad Stuff. I do think there is Bad Stuff in Vue. Good example are mixins. They should DIAF.

Let's talk it out.

The Good Stuff: Virtual DOM, Reactive Stores, and hooks. Great ideas, and Vue took them and ran.

The Bad Stuff: The rest from here on out is the bad stuff. The main takeaway is that React does nothing to discourage a lot of really bad habits that I thought had died out with jQuery, but are alive and well in React today. Wanna mix business logic and render logic till it feels like you're trying to cook a new meal by picking pepper out of a TV dinner? JSX has your back all day. Wanna have 15 different conflicting getting started tutorials from the official sites for the official store library? Redux will have you running in circles all week. Don't get me started on WebPack. The Vue community gave y'all Vite to save you from yourselves, you're welcome.

Made for the love by an independent vs Made and mandated by a corporate hierarchy: React is a foundation at this point, but there's no getting around the fact that React is the product of a megacorporation with more money than God. They created it so that everyone at Facebook/Meta would be using a common library, and open sourced it so that Facebook/Meta would have a wider talent pool that already knew their internal tooling. React had some good ideas at its launch, I think I've made that clear, but it also had a lot of warts. People could overlook its shortcomings bc they weren't clear yet and also they wanted work at Facebook, left Facebook to do a startup and kept using what the knew, or wanted their startup to have some of Facebook's magic. That wasn't all there was to its success, but c'mon, a corporation that was basically printing money for 10-15 years had a lot a weight to throw around. Sure Evan You is one guy and that's the first ingredient of a cult of personality, but he was one guy who couldn't make people use his framework under pain of no paycheck. Vue has to be both good and enjoyable to use to stay relevant. 

The learning curve: With React, it sucks. It really does. The amount of concepts you need to know to properly get off the ground are considerable. I'm a greybeard, so I can do it; doesn't mean I enjoyed it. I don't think its a coincidence that the primary author of Vue and the primary author of the Vue Guide (there aren't really docs so much as the one Guide) are the same person: Evan You. Tons of other contributors, for sure, but Vue is built at every step to teach you Vue. Every time it started to suck using Vue, it always meant I was ready for the next concept in the Guide. Learning React means having no shortages of objectively bad ways to do things. I've taken a team who only knew rudimentary jQuery and got them being productive in Vue in under a week. I know you can do React with no build step, but c'mon really? When was the last time you honestly saw that?

JSX: As a guy who comes from .NET land, you'd think I would like JSX because it took so much inspiration from dotnet's Razor template language, which mixes C# and markup, but I don't. As a piece of design, I think it's an abomination. Markup is declarative code and JS/TS is imperative code. The have two different and totally conflicting concepts of time. The point of JSX, as is proudly stated in the React docs is "in React, rendering logic and markup live together in the same place—components". Great, laudable goal. But JSX is like if that wish was granted by a monkey's paw. Vue does the same thing, but differently. You got your .vue files with a place for markup, a place for business logic written in JS or TS, and a place for styles scoped to the component or not at your desire. It's like a bento box for your code. If you need to refer to an element from markup, well, we stole refs from y'all too. Thanks for that one.

UseState: useState() is a miserable idea. Like, I get it, you need a way for data to persist, but nobody forced the people at Meta to go full Haskell on their frontend framework. 
Pointed difference between Vue's official guidance for use of state/props and React's. React explicitly advises you to pass props down multiple levels of your component hierarchy. The Vue Guide explicitly says don't do that- if you're passing props more than two levels deep, your app will become brittle and hard to change - use a state store past that point. Seriously, go compare them.

UseEffect: Lifecycle hooks are great, but this one gives no idea as to it's author's intent. You have to squint at the code like Nostrodamus to guess what the hell it was meant to do half the time.

Look, I know I'm was a bit snarky, but I'm taking a break from writing React to write this and blowing off some steam. The code base I'm untangling ain't pretty. I think having opinions is professionally healthy. I'm sure y'all will continue to have success out there with React and I hope you do. But if you've never tried another framework, I beg you to do so now. Doesn't even have to be Vue. I don't have a clue why people like Svelte, why don't you find out and get one up on me?
